GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Donald
Trump attempts a campaign reset
with a focus
on the economy, while Hillary
Clinton holds
tight to a lead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: The
Rio Olympic
Games are on.
We round up the best moments of
weekend wins,
and some of the lingering
controversy over
doping.
GWEN IFILL: And refugees moving
to Upstate
New York discover their health
care needs
move beyond what's visible.
KOWSAR ALI, Jericho Road: It's
actually hard
for them, because there's
nothing as depression.
They say, OK, because that never
existed in
my country.
There's nothing as depression.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Delta Air Lines
canceled more
than 400 flights today, after a
global crash
of its computer systems.
Hours later, the carrier resumed
limited service.
But the glitch also delayed more
than 1,000
flights, and left passengers
stranded.
Some complained they'd been
given little information.
MAN: When I got here, I waited.
I got here like 8:37 flight, and
then it kept
going, you know, delayed,
delaying it.
And then they never announced
that it was
canceled.
So I had to call the service and
they told
me it was canceled.
So they gave me another flight,
but now I
got a flight tomorrow.
So, it was the fact that they
didn't let me
know what was going on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The trouble was
caused by a
power outage in Atlanta.
The utility Georgia Power said a
kind of industrial
circuit-breaker called a switch
gear failed.
Just last month, Southwest
Airlines was hit
by an equipment failure that
canceled 2000
flights.
GWEN IFILL: In Southwestern
Pakistan, a suicide
bombing killed at least 67
people today, and
wounded scores more.
It happened in a hospital in the
city of Quetta.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television
News reports.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Ambulances
usually arrive
at hospitals in a hurry.
In Quetta this morning, they
were leaving,
ferrying the injured away from
an attack on
a hospital itself.
As smoke filled the corridors,
it quickly
became clear the timing was
deliberate.
First, men on a motorbike had
shot dead Bilal
Kasi, a senior lawyer on his way
to court.
Then the group waited for his
fellow lawyers
to gather here before blowing
them up, the
so-called double tap, as cynical
as it was
cruel.
MERAJ TAREEN, Attorney: After
our bar association
president was targeted, we all
came to the
hospital.
We were leaving the hospital
after Kasich's
autopsy and the media were
interviewing lawyers
when the blast took place.
For many minutes, there was
darkness all around
us, and then we heard gunshots.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Lawyers
complained to visiting
army chiefs that, while they
haven't been
allowed to drive their cars into
the hospital,
a suicide bomber had managed to
get through,
while the hospital's director
told the press
that just one guard armed with a
baton was
in charge of security, which
might seem all
the more scandalous, given that
these pictures
from January show the same
hospital, this
time receiving survivors from
another deadly
suicide bombing on another
medical facility
in the town.
So, once again, Pakistanis are
crying out
for security, putting pressure
on their Prime
Minister, Nawaz Sharif, and his
army chief,
who visited the hospital this
evening.
"For God sake, don't back off,"
this survivor
told the prime minister.
"It's a handful of people we
must fight with
all our might.
Don't lose courage."
GWEN IFILL: Both the Islamic
State group and
a breakaway Taliban faction
claimed responsibility
for the attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Japan's Emperor
Akihito signaled
today he'd like to step down.
His position is symbolic, and he
has no political
power, but his abdication would
require a
constitutional change.
He spoke in a rare 10-minute
address pre-recorded
and broadcast nationally.
EMPEROR AKIHITO, Japan (through
translator):
I am already more than 80 years
old, and fortunately
I am now in good health.
However, when I consider that my
fitness level
is gradually declining, I am
worried that
it may become difficult for me
to carry out
my duties with my whole being as
the symbol
of the state, as I have done
until now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Over the years,
Akihito has
had heart surgery and been
treated for prostate
cancer.
He is the 125th emperor in a
dynastic line
that goes back more than 2,700
years.
GWEN IFILL: Parts of Eastern
Mexico are reeling
after the remnants of Hurricane
Earl touched
off deadly mudslides over the
weekend, killing
40 people.
Surging rainwater uprooted
buildings and tore
through concrete walls on
Saturday.
Soldiers and first-responders
worked Sunday
to clear debris caked in mud.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wal-Mart is
moving to muscle
up in online sales, buying
online retailer
Jet.com.
The deal announced today
includes $3 billion
in cash and $300 million in
stock.
Wal-Mart is looking to
strengthen its Web
presence and capitalize on a
growing group
of customers who want to buy in
bulk online.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost 14
points to
close at 18,529.
The Nasdaq fell about eight
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Russia fired
back today,
after its entire Paralympic team
was banned
from next month's games for
athletes with
physical disabilities.
The Russian Organizing Committee
said the
ban for alleged doping amounts
to a human
rights abuse.
The same doping scandal barred
more than 100
Russian athletes from the
current Olympics
in Rio de Janeiro.
The Paralympics will also be in
Rio.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump's
plan that he says will
revitalize the economy;
U.S. Olympians shattering
records and taking
home gold; a city caring for
refugees' unseen
needs; and much more.
GWEN IFILL: The two major
candidates for president
jostled for position in the last
week, stepping
into and out of political
corners, and attempting
to paint the other as unfit and
unstable.
Today, Donald Trump stuck to
policy, while
Hillary Clinton stuck it to
Donald Trump.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
These reforms will offer biggest
tax revolution
since the Reagan tax reform.
GWEN IFILL: Trump chose the
traditional campaign
setting of the Detroit Economic
Club to deliver
the sober outline of his
economic ideas, starting
with taxes.
DONALD TRUMP: I am proposing an
across-the-board
income tax reduction, especially
for middle-income
Americans.
This will lead to millions of
new and really
good-paying jobs.
The rich will pay their fair
share, but no
one will pay so much that it
destroys jobs,
or undermines our ability as a
nation to compete.
GWEN IFILL: But throughout his
scripted remarks,
Trump was regularly interrupted
at least a
dozen times by hecklers.
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you.
I will say, the Bernie Sanders
people had
far more energy and spirit.
GWEN IFILL: Trump's tax plan
envisions three
income tax brackets of 33
percent, 25 percent
and 12 percent.
His original plan, last fall,
topped out at
25 percent for the wealthiest
earners.
Trump also argued for cutting
the top corporate
tax rate to 15 percent, less
than half what
it is now.
The Republican nominee also
called for a freeze
on new government regulation.
DONALD TRUMP: It is time to
remove the anchor
dragging us down.
And that's what it's doing.
It's dragging us down.
Upon taking office, I will issue
a temporary
moratorium on new agency
regulations.
GWEN IFILL: Trump said the
specifics of his
plan will be spelled out on his
Web site at
some point.
But he used today's remarks to
attack Hillary
Clinton's approach to economic
policy, saying,
it punishes you for working and
doing business
in the United States.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
It's clear -- and a lot of the
journalists
have written this -- that Trump
is scrambling
to do damage control.
GWEN IFILL: Clinton, who
campaigned in Florida
today, including a brewery tour
in St. Petersburg,
was quick to dismiss Trump's
economic plan.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He wants
to basically
just repackage trickle-down
economics.
(BOOING)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Now, you
know, that
old saying, fool me once, shame
on you, fool
me twice, shame on me?
GWEN IFILL: The candidates
sparred as Trump
tumbled in the polls after a
series of political
missteps last week.
On Friday, he finally endorsed
House Speaker
Paul Ryan and others he had
initially declined
to support.
Meanwhile, a new face, little
known GOP operative
Evan McMullin, said he is hoping
to capitalize
on Republican unease by
launching his own
independent bid for president.
Are the polls real?
Will the reset take?
For more on the state of this
topsy turvy
political year, we turn to
Politics Monday.
That's Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report
and Tamara Keith of NPR.
Welcome back, ladies.
Tamara, tell me about this Trump
speech today.
Was this the reset, the pivot we
keep talking
about?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Or was
the last one the pivot?
GWEN IFILL: Or was the last one?
TAMARA KEITH: Or was the last
one before that
the pivot?
Hillary Clinton just said this.
There is only one Trump.
There are different flavors of
Donald Trump.
There's teleprompter speech,
policy speech
Donald Trump, which is what we
got today.
There is rally Donald Trump,
where he says
stuff and gets the crowd going,
and then there
is Twitter Donald Trump at
various hours of
the day.
This is part -- about once every
month, we
get one of these teleprompter
speeches.
In some way, this was a reset.
His tax plan that you mentioned
in the piece,
it was on his Web site until
about 24 hours
ago.
Then it came down.
Now there's a new tax plan which
aligns with
a tax plan from House
Republicans, moves him
more into the orbit of the
Republican mainstream.
And there were several things in
this speech
that moved him a little bit
closer to the
Republican mainstream.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Go ahead, Amy.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
And I think that's the key,
because if you
look at the biggest challenge
for Donald Trump
right now, he's doing very well
among these
white working-class voters.
We keep talking about that.
Where he's not doing well are
white white-collar
voters.
And this was a message directly
related to
them.
It was interesting to see
Hillary Clinton
talk about repackaging
Reaganomics.
For a lot of those voters who
right now are
saying either I'm voting for
Hillary Clinton
or I'm undecided on Donald
Trump, they kind
of like the Reaganomics message.
They like the tax cut message.
They like the lack of regulation
-- or scaling
back on regulation message.
And the economy is one -- of the
14 different
areas that The Wall Street
Journal poll asked
who do you think does a better
job of question,
Donald Trump only was ahead on
four of those.
One of those was the economy.
This is a place where, if I were
that campaign,
I would be spending much more
time talking
about the economy, a lot less
time beating
up on your fellow Republicans.
GWEN IFILL: And of course we are
going to
hear more from Hillary Clinton
on the subject
later -- or as the week goes on
apparently
every day.
Tam, let's talk about last
week's unforced,
or were they unforced errors,
the errors,
the series of errors.
Is that what led us to today, to
the teleprompter
speech?
TAMARA KEITH: It certainly would
seem like
he needed a reset.
He need to have a clean break
from last week's
sort of rolling errors.
But, even as late as yesterday,
he was tweeting
fact-checks about the baby, the
baby being
a baby that...
GWEN IFILL: Crying baby that he
made the joke
about.
TAMARA KEITH: There was a crying
baby.
And then he made a joke and it
was interpreted
as him kicking a baby out of a
rally, when
maybe the baby had already left.
But as late as yesterday, he was
tweeting
about this.
So today's speech, the challenge
is, we are
getting closer and closer to the
general election.
And in today's speech, he said I
will have
more specifics, I will have
details on my
Web site, tune in, in a couple
of weeks.
We have heard that before.
And so I wait for digging into
policy, but
maybe this race isn't really
about policy.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: That's part of the
question.
But on the other hand, let's
just measure
this by -- just for giggles, by
conventional
measures.
Hillary Clinton, including
during the Olympics,
is hammering him with anti-Trump
ads.
Not a peep in conventional sense
coming from
Donald Trump.
AMY WALTER: Right.
He still has yet to show us that
he's going
to run a traditional campaign.
Now, look, he's gotten this far.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Not one ad, not one
television
ad.
AMY WALTER: Not one television
He doesn't have a traditional
anything.
Right?
And he's gotten this far.
And so this is what we have been
going back
and forth about for this entire
campaign,
which is he's either going to
show us at the
end of the day that he's upended
all the rules
of politics, that you don't need
these fancy
consultants, you don't need ads,
you don't
need polls, you don't need any
of it, just
your personality and your
message and the
environment alone can drive
voters to the
polls.
GWEN IFILL: But let me try
something with
you.
AMY WALTER: Yes, please.
GWEN IFILL: When we were sitting
at the conventions
and we heard him say, "I am your
voice," I
think we all agreed that that
was his message,
that he had settled on a
message.
We have not heard that since.
AMY WALTER: Well, I think still
to the voters
that support him, that still is
the message,
that he is going to be the
person that stands
up for us.
His challenge is that he hasn't
broadened
it beyond that same group of
voters he was
speaking to at the convention.
And this speech for the first
time what he
did was he married the
traditional sort of
Chamber of Commerce, Republican
message on
taxes and entitlements with the
populist,
anti-NAFTA, anti-trade message
that he's been
saying on the trial, trying to
bring the party
together.
Again, unifying the party has
been a challenge
that he continues to struggle
with.
And until he figures that out,
Hillary Clinton
is going to continue to have a
lead.
GWEN IFILL: Well, and also for
the first time,
we have seen kind of both
candidates talking
about mental stability as an
issue, speaking
about their opponent.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
Hillary's campaign begun this
several months
-- or at least a month ago, I
would say, talking
about whether he's
temperamentally fit to
be president.
At the convention, Michael
Bloomberg said,
let's choose a sane candidate.
And that was a big moment.
Here's a major figure at a
convention talking
about sanity.
Donald Trump this week seems to
have gone
to the "I know you are, but what
am I?"
school, and now he's saying that
Hillary Clinton
is temperamentally unfit.
GWEN IFILL: Based on her comment
saying that
she short-circuited an answer on
e-mails.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, she
short-circuited an
answer.
This has also spawned some
conspiracy theories
about her health.
GWEN IFILL: So, let's talk about
someone else
getting into the race, someone
probably I
think it's fair the three of us
had never
heard of, a gentleman by the
name of Evan
McMullin, who says he's going to
represent
all the Republicans who are not
for Trump.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Who is he?
AMY WALTER: He's a former CIA
operative.
He's a former House staffer.
He now is retired from his
position at the
House.
This is what we have been
talking about, I
feel like, at this table for so
long.
You have this group of
Republicans who say
they can't support Trump, but
they can't find
somebody else to rally around.
Here is his challenge, getting
on ballots
in many states.
The deadlines have closed.
GWEN IFILL: The same time -- the
last time
we talked about David French
right now, yes.
AMY WALTER: Remember that, David
French?
His challenge, getting on
ballots.
This is a candidate who also
went to BYU,
the thought being he could play
well in a
place like Utah or Arizona that
have a big
Mormon population.
Arizona, you have to get a lot
of signatures
to get on the ballot.
And the deadline there is the
first week in
September.
Utah, not as arduous, but that
means just
like one or two states that he
may have an
impact on.
And, quite frankly, if we're
talking about
Arizona in Utah in September and
October,
this race is a blowout.
Like, it's not even going to be
lose.
We might as well just sleep in
on Election
Day.
GWEN IFILL: But except it
doesn't seem at
all to be the case.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
GWEN IFILL: At least, no one is
willing to
quite go that far.
So, the Friday light, late
night, programmed
against the Olympics endorsement
of Paul Ryan,
Kelly Ayotte, and John McCain,
does that help
them at all, or does it hurt
them?
TAMARA KEITH: No.
And it really looked like those
endorsements
came under duress.
He was reading.
He looked uncomfortable saying
it.
No, it doesn't help them.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
If I were Senator Kelly Ayotte,
who right
now is looking at a very, very
tough race
in a state that's now turning
away from Donald
Trump, I would be like, you know
what, thanks,
but that's OK, you can keep your
endorsement.
GWEN IFILL: And I think that's
kind of what
Paul Ryan said, which was,
that's nice.
AMY WALTER: That's nice, but I
don't...
GWEN IFILL: You don't think it
necessarily
helps?
You don't think it necessarily
TAMARA KEITH: No, they're in a
tough spot.
All of these people who are
down-ballot are
in a tough spot, because they
don't -- they
have already on some level
associated themselves
with the person at the top of
the ticket.
And at the same time, they are
trying to distance
themselves.
And Democrats aren't going to
let them get
away with distancing themselves
one bit.
GWEN IFILL: And brace for
whatever may happen
this week, as opposed to last
week.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara Keith of NPR,
Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report,
thank you both
very much.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For all of the
concerns and
problems leading into Rio, the
first days
of the Olympics generally went
off well, with
memorable moments, and the hope
of a promising
week to come for the USA.
After one weekend in Rio,
American swimmers
are living up to golden
expectations so far.
Powerhouse swimmer Katie Ledecky
grabbed her
first gold medal of these games
Sunday night,
breaking her own world record in
the 400-meter
freestyle, with competitors
almost five seconds
in her wake.
KATIE LEDECKY, Olympic Gold
Medal Winner:
It's an amazing feeling, to sing
the national
anthem and see the flags raised.
I got to go out there with a
teammate and
we sang our hearts out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Veteran Michael
Phelps, who's
now 31 years old, collected his
19th gold,
as part of the men's 4-by-100
relay team.
Also Sunday, the U.S. women
gymnastics team
proved their dominance in
qualifying for the
all-around category, which
permits only two
per country.
Favorite Simone Biles soared to
the number
one spot.
Teammate Aly Raisman will join
her in the
finals, edging out 2012 gold
medalist Gabby
Douglas for the second U.S.
slot.
And, today, fencer Ibtihaj
Muhammad became
the first American Olympian to
compete wearing
a Muslim hijab, or head scarf.
She won her first round, before
being defeated.
Meanwhile, uproars over doping
are still swirling
over Rio.
Russian swimmer Yulia Efimova
faced boos before
a preliminary race on Sunday.
She had been banned after
failing drug tests,
and then reinstated.
American Lily King made clear
her displeasure
about Efimova's presence in the
pool.
And on Saturday, Australian
swimmer Mack Horton
accused his Chinese rival Sun
Yang of being
a -- quote -- "drug cheat" and
then beat him
in the 400-meter freestyle.
Chinese officials have demanded
an apology.
Now for an on-the-ground
perspective from
Rio, I spoke a short time ago to
Christine
Brennan, a sportswriter and
columnist who's
covering the Games for USA
Today.
She's also a contributor for ABC
News.
Christine Brennan, hello.
It's been quite a weekend for
the United States
in swimming.
Tell us what it's been like at
the swimming
venue.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today: I
will tell
you, Judy, it was really an
electric evening
and certainly for the United
States last night,
with both Katie Ledecky in the
400 freestyle,
world record performance,
breaking her on
world record by almost two
seconds.
And then within, what, maybe 20,
30 minutes,
you had that relay, of course,
Michael Phelps
coming back to the pool for the
first time,
31 years old now, his fifth
Olympic Games.
And what does he do?
He's in the second leg of that
four-person
relay and he stakes the U.S. out
to a lead,
and the U.S. -- his two
teammates just came
in and won, beating the French.
The crowd, you would have
thought it was a
U.S. crowd, in the sense that
here we are
in Rio.
But it was a really majestic
moment, I think,
but with the knowledge that the
fans had that
they were watching something
special, watching
Michael Phelps return, the
greatest Olympian
of all time, winning his 19th
gold medal.
So, those two things back to
back -- and Katie
Ledecky even said it after she
won.
She goes, "I think there's going
to be another
gold medal."
She was the first for the U.S.
in the pool.
Usually, the U.S. dominates in
the swimming
pool.
And I think we will see that
over the next
few days as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it about
Katie Ledecky?
What puts her far ahead of the
competition?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, I think
all of her
opponents would love to know
that.
She's competing really only
against herself.
The 800 freestyle is hers.
She will be even farther ahead
in that.
People should get used to seeing
that.
She's just one of these people
who has a wonderful
attitude about life, super
smart, going to
Stanford, and gets it, has a
great perspective,
wonderful family that loves
sports, and also,
for herself, just a sense that
she just wants
to better herself.
It sounds like a cliche, but she
just goes
out there, follows her coach's
orders, kind
of the model student, the model
athlete, and
just puts it together, and is
absolutely on
top of her game at the most
important moment
of her life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Michael
Phelps, as you
said, he's now 31 years old.
He came into these Games with 18
gold medals.
He just picked up another one
last night.
What is he looking to do in Rio?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, he's
got a lot more.
He's just beginning.
And people are going to say,
what, more Michael
Phelps?
Yes.
He's got the 100 butterfly, 200
butterfly,
200 individual medley and
probably one more
relay.
So we're just beginning to see
Phelps.
And this is shocking.
When you think about this in
sports, swimming
is a young person's came.
As I said, Katie Ledecky is 19
years old.
Somebody of these people are --
a lot of teenagers
in the pool.
And here's Michael Phelps, 31.
Now, he has certainly had some
difficulties
in his life.
He went to rehab after a second
DUI.
He has acknowledged his
problems.
But the fact that he could be so
strong at
31 -- in most sports, he would
long since
be retired, in terms of his age
-- and yet
he's just still as dominant as
ever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then you have
the doping
allegations around the Russians
and others.
It's already causing a backlash
among a number
of the athletes.
How is that affecting things
there?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: I will tell
you, it's been
really interesting.
And I think the metaphor for the
entire conversation,
Judy, about Russian doping, the
diabolical
Russian doping machine and the
fact that they
were allowed to compete in the
Olympics, as
opposed to being kicked out, as
I thought
they should be, the metaphor
really is -- the
pool is a metaphor for that.
The booing for these athletes,
Yulia Efimova
especially, the breast stroker,
loud boos
for her, loud boos for the
Russian men's 4x100
freestyle relay team, you never
hear that,
ever.
And what is that?
That's the swimmers.
That's coming especially coming
from the swimming
section.
The swimmers know.
They know.
They're disgusted by this.
And I know people will say, hey,
Lance Armstrong
cheated and Marion Jones.
The U.S. has probably given the
world the
two worst cheaters ever in Lance
Armstrong
and Marion Jones.
The big difference is that for
Russia it was
government-sponsored,
state-sponsored doping.
The equivalent would be if a
member of President
Obama's Cabinet ran a five-year
doping plan
in the United States involving
the FBI, the
CIA, U.S. Olympic Committee, and
U.S. Anti-Doping
Agency.
That's how diabolical the
Russian plan was.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One other sport
Gymnastics,
this was the first Olympics
appearance for
Simone Biles of the United
States, who she
absolutely lived up to her
billing in that
qualifying event yesterday.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh, she sure
did.
Think Mary Lou Retton and Gabby
Douglas and
Olga Korbut and Nadia Comaneci
into one.
In many ways, we are seeing the
culmination
of an entire sport in one
person.
Simone Biles is that good.
And the U.S. team is that good.
This is a sport the you can have
a point,
a tenth of a point deciding
first, second,
third.
The U.S. was 10 points ahead as
a team in
the qualifying yesterday.
And the team, the U.S. team,
will certainly
win the gold medal, barring some
incredible
unforeseen occurrence tomorrow.
So there's that.
That's the team competition.
Then Simone Biles in the
individual all-around,
she is expected to win the gold.
And then she is expected to go
on to the individual
apparatuses and actually keep
winning gold.
And Simone Biles, I believe by
the time these
Olympic Games are over, will be
seen as the
greatest U.S. gymnast ever.
And I'll tell you, that's saying
something,
because there is certainly a lot
of competition
for that title.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally,
Christine, after all
the hype and the negative
stories about Brazil,
about Rio running up to these
Olympics, how
do these first few days feel to
you?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Judy, I have
to say that
these Games have been a pleasant
surprise.
There are issues with
transportation and buses
not coming and things like that,
but it really
feels like an Olympics to me.
And when I say that, I mean
everything about
it.
The opening ceremony, I thought,
was actually
terrific on a budget.
They did more with less, far
less budget than,
say -- far fewer dollars to
spend than Beijing
in '08 with their grandiose
ceremony or London
in 2012.
And I thought they did a great
job with a
message, with a conscience.
And I think that has carried
over the last
few days.
You have seen good will in many
places.
Of course, I mentioned the
booing, but good
will in many places.
You have seen great upsets.
You have seen athletes care so
much about
this.
And the Games are moving on.
Knock on wood.
We will see how it goes over the
next two
weeks.
But they really seem to be going
on just fine.
When you consider the National
Football League
had to cancel its Hall of Fame
game because
of a problem on the field, they
couldn't put
on one football game, and here
Rio is seemingly
them moving ahead with all of
these venues,
and so far, so good.
I think that's in many ways a
big sports upset,
but it's also a nice thing to
see as the Games
have started.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christine
Brennan, thank you
very much.
And we look forward to talking
to you in the
days to come.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: You bet,
Judy.
Thank you very much.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
efforts to make
peace between high schoolers and
police; and
the harmonies of Neko Case, K.D.
Lang and
Laura Veirs.
But, first: President Obama has
pledged to
accept 10,000 Syrian refugees by
October,
despite resistance playing out
in many communities.
Refugees, many of them rootless
for years,
often arrive with significant
medical problems
and psychological trauma.
Special correspondent Sarah
Varney brings
us this report about how one
city, Buffalo,
New York, is adapting.
Her story was produced in
collaboration with
our partner Kaiser Health News.
SARAH VARNEY: Since Murhaf,
Ghenwa, and their
children moved here from Syria,
even mundane
tasks like cooking and homework
have become
more complicated.
MAN: They have 10 airplanes.
SARAH VARNEY: Unaccustomed tote
this new life,
the family relies on help from
Hassan Alishaqi
from a local resettlement agency
called Journey's
End.
Refugee agencies help families
like this one
find housing and jobs, get
medical care and
health insurance and enroll in
English classes
and schools.
They fled Syria after civil war
erupted there
in 2011, unleashing an exodus of
more than
four million refugees.
The destruction and violence
came close to
Murhaf's family during one their
last nights
in the city of Homs.
MAN (through translator): Some
bullets came
to my house through the window.
And I was afraid for the safety
of my kids.
They never sleep because of --
it's just very
hard for them to sleep.
SARAH VARNEY: After a year in
Cairo and exhaustive
security checks, the family
arrived in Buffalo,
a quiet city on the edge of Lake
Erie.
And like many new arrivals here,
they're struggling
with the aftermath of their
horrific journey
as they attempt to build
healthier lives in
their new home.
More than 90 percent of the
refugees who resettle
to New York live in Upstate New
York.
The city of Buffalo has become a
welcoming
haven for many of them.
But over the last 15 years, the
countries
and conflicts they come from
have changed.
And the health care needs of
refugees are
changing, too.
Jericho Road is a community
health center
in Buffalo that has long treated
refugees
from some of the world's poorest
countries,
including Myanmar, Bhutan, Sudan
and Somalia.
The clinic is a crossroads of
languages and
customs.
New refugees receive free
medical assistance
from the federal government for
eight months.
Then they can buy private
insurance or enroll
in Medicaid.
DR.
MYRON GLICK, Jericho Road: When
you came,
we found that your T.B. test was
positive.
So I think you are now taking
medicine for
that, right?
SARAH VARNEY: The clinic's
founder, Dr. Myron
Glick, often treats refugees for
tuberculosis,
malaria and childhood
malnutrition.
But he says the more recent
arrivals from
Iraq and Syria, which are
middle-income countries,
typically don't suffer from
diseases of poverty,
but instead have been
traumatized by war.
A critical report by local
leaders that examined
the area's safety net found that
health care
providers urgently need to
improve culturally
appropriate mental health
services.
And more clinics needed to
follow Jericho
Road's model, hiring refugees
who can help
new arrivals adjust.
Kowsar Ali, a Somali and Arabic
interpreter,
says just figuring out how to
explain a patient's
symptoms and a doctor's
diagnosis is a puzzle,
words and phrases with no
English equivalent,
medical terms like PTSD and
depression that
are unfamiliar.
KOWSAR ALI, Jericho Road: It's
actually hard
for them because there's nothing
as depression.
They say, OK, because that never
existed in
my country.
There's nothing as depression.
SARAH VARNEY: Dr. Glick says the
initial relief
refugees feel when they reach
safety often
gives way to a new reality.
DR.
MYRON GLICK: All the horrible
things that
happen to people along their
journey to America,
and yet really they come with
hope.
And a year, two years in, you
see that hope
dissipate.
It's really challenging here in
America to
deal with the stresses that are
thrust upon
them without the support of
their home community.
SARAH VARNEY: That sense of
isolation is easing
for some.
Ali Kadhum arrived in Buffalo in
2008, just
as the fledgling Iraqi community
was taking
root.
Back then, Kadhum says there
were just 25
families.
ALI KADHUM, Lake Shore
Behavioral Health:
Now it's almost 750 Iraqi
families.
SARAH VARNEY: Today, he says
Iraqis bump into
each other around town.
ALI KADHUM: They feel they are
not alone.
They feel they are still living
in Iraq, because
people, there's restaurants,
cook their food
here.
There is some people speak their
language,
at least, and they can
communicate.
SARAH VARNEY: So many refugees
have moved
here that the population of Erie
County, home
to Buffalo, is growing for the
first time
since the 1960s.
And they are reshaping a city
that has struggled
to find its way in the modern
economy.
Old factories now house
English-language classes.
At a small business incubator,
women sell
Iraqi macrame and Rwandan
scarves, and vendors
claim to sell the best dim sum
in Buffalo.
Refugee children pursue music in
a program
called Buffalo String Works, and
are mentored
by professional musicians.
Health systems here are
adapting, too.
A Catholic Church once, filled
with Italian
and Irish congregates, recently
reopened as
a health clinic for new
immigrants.
And with so many arrivals from
active war
zones, the University at Buffalo
tapped Dr.
Kim Griswold to help lead the
Western New
York Center for Survivors of
Torture.
DR.
KIM GRISWOLD, Western New York
Center for
Survivors of Torture: Some of
the folks that
we have seen have been horribly
tortured physically,
with scars to prove it,
amputations, other
things that we have seen that
are horrific,
cigarette burns, whipping.
SARAH VARNEY: Kareem Khaleefah,
who worked
for the U.S. Army in Baghdad,
was kidnapped
by a Shia militia, lined up with
20 other
men and shot.
KAREEM KHALEEFAH, Worked for
U.S. Army (through
translator): I was like super
lucky that the
bullets come on the side of my
body.
SARAH VARNEY: He fell to the
ground and pretended
to be dead until nightfall.
Even in Buffalo's quiet
neighborhoods, those
memories never fade, says
Kadhum, a mental
health counselor at Lake Shore
Behavioral
Health.
He says many older Iraqis, like
Saja Alnaqeeb
and her husband, Mahmoud, once
lived prosperous,
vibrant lives.
Then, in 2005, Saja was tortured
and the family
fled.
Now she stays inside, tormented
by her memories.
WOMAN (through translator): My
family, sometimes,
they wake up, they find me
screaming at night
with these nightmares.
SARAH VARNEY: The images she
sees on the news
are a constant reminder of the
continuing
violence in Iraq.
She worries about her children
and grandchildren
still in Baghdad.
WOMAN (through translator): My
mind is about
them.
Every time they mention to me
they are unsafe,
they are getting threatened,
they move their
place from place to place just
to make sure
that they are -- protect their
kids and family.
SARAH VARNEY: The recent spate
of violent
attacks worldwide have fueled
anti-immigrant
and anti-refugee sentiment.
But experts on human migration
say these events
are rare, and, in fact, it's
refugees who
often face discrimination and
violence.
Neil Boothby is a professor at
Columbia University.
NEIL BOOTHBY, Columbia
University: There's
going to be language issues.
There's going to be cultural
issues.
What happens if a girl wants to
wear a scarf
over her head?
How is the community going to
respond to that?
What if people need to spend a
lot of time
in the mosques?
How are we going to respond to
that?
So it's going to be an
adjustment, I think,
for each side.
SARAH VARNEY: In Buffalo, the
focus now is
to enroll more people in mental
health counseling.
At a Lake Shore clinic,
patients, like Kurd
Bllnd struggle to reconcile
religion, sectarian
and ethnic violence that has
persisted for
decades.
KURD BLLND, Patient (through
translator):
What happened to the Kurdish in
Iraq, of course
you're going to be upset and
angry and anxious.
SARAH VARNEY: Bllnd, who grew up
in a Kurdish
village in Iraq, was jailed and
interrogated
for three years in the 1980s.
KURD BLLND (through translator):
Since the
age of 12 years until now -- I'm
67 years
of age -- I didn't see anything
good in life.
SARAH VARNEY: Two years after he
arrived in
Buffalo, Bllnd reluctantly
agreed to seek
help.
KURD BLLND: They told me, if you
go there,
somebody talk to you.
Maybe you forget past, what
happened to you.
JESSICA MARMION, Lake Shore
Behavioral Health:
The key stressor, I think, is
isolation.
So, they come here, they don't
speak the language,
they really only know their
immediate family.
SARAH VARNEY: Jessica Marmion is
a clinical
social worker who teams up with
interpreter
Afaf Pickering.
AFAF PICKERING, Lake Shore
Behavioral Health:
We have like all kinds of people
coming.
We have lawyers.
We have businesspeople.
We have -- you need sometimes to
talk about
your problems, especially coming
from a country
of war.
You went through trauma.
You went through death.
You went through some violence.
So, we're not superhuman.
SARAH VARNEY: As new refugees
arrive each
day in Buffalo, known as the
City of Good
Neighbors, health care leaders
say they will
continue to listen, to reach
out, and help
refugee families find new
opportunities in
a changing American city.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Kaiser Health News,
I'm Sarah Varney in Buffalo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last September, a
federal court
in Alabama ruled that the
Birmingham Police
Department's disciplinary
practices, including
the use of pepper spray for
minor discipline
problems, is in violation of
student rights
and unconstitutional.
Attorney Ebony Howard of the
Southern Poverty
Law Center filed the
class-action suit, and
returns to court next month when
the police
department's appeal is heard.
As part of our year-long Race
Matters conversations
focusing on solutions, special
correspondent
Charlayne Hunter-Gault reports
from Birmingham
about reducing tensions between
African-American
high school students and the
police.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: This
video of a white
South Carolina policeman roughly
ejecting
a black student from her
classroom went viral
and ignited a conversation about
the proper
role for police in schools.
Ebony Howard, a lawyer with the
Southern Poverty
Law Center, has been involved in
that conversation
as a result of her successful
suit against
police macing students in
Montgomery, Alabama.
Ebony Howard, thank you for
joining us.
EBONY HOWARD, Southern Poverty
Law Center:
Thank you for having me.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Can you
tell us briefly
about the case you won in
Birmingham last
year?
EBONY HOWARD: Sure.
The case was about police
officers who are
stationed in Birmingham City
high schools
who are there to protect
students, and they
were using mace, or pepper spray
is what it's
sometimes called, against
students for engaging
in what amounts to normal
adolescent behavior.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Like
what?
EBONY HOWARD: Like, for example,
one of our
plaintiffs, plaintiff K.B., she
was leaving
class and going to another class
with a fellow
classmate.
And as she walked, a boy came up
to her and
started to call her really foul
names that
I won't repeat.
But as he called her those
names, his friends
who had come with him, they
started to laugh.
And the more they laughed, the
more names
he called her.
And so she tried to walk away
from him.
And as she walked away, he
followed her and
his friends followed her, and he
continued
to call her lots and lots of
names.
And so eventually, as she walked
the entire
length of the school building,
she started
to cry.
And she became hysterical.
And when she reached the end of
the school
building, a police officer
walked up.
And you would think that he
would have taken
care of her, but what he did
was, he told
her to calm down or he was going
to arrest
her.
And when she didn't stop crying,
he put her
in handcuffs.
And she continued to cry after
he handcuffed
her, and he told her, calm down.
And when she didn't calm down
fast enough,
he sprayed her with mace.
The other point that I forgot to
mention,
though, was that she was four
months' pregnant
at the time when he sprayed her
with mace.
She was arrested and taken to
the local juvenile
facility, where she had to take
off her pants
and her underwear and squat and
cough as a
part of a strip search.
And so those are the kinds of
things that
were happening in Birmingham
City schools.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Now, you
argued the
things that are happening to
black students,
with examples like the ones you
just gave,
are very different from what
happens in white
schools.
Tell me just how different.
EBONY HOWARD: Right.
So, for example, the Birmingham
City School
System is 99 percent
African-American; 85
percent of the students are on
free and reduced
lunch.
In contrast, a neighboring
school district,
the Jefferson County School
District, is much
more integrated, has far more
white students.
In the past 10 years, police
officers who
are in the Jefferson County
School District
have used mace 10 times.
That's over 10 years.
In contrast, during a five-year
period in
Birmingham City, almost 300
students were
sprayed with mace.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
what do you
say to the critics who say that
a lot of these
kids are violent, that some are
gang members,
and that they get into
horrendous fights and
things like that in these
schools and need
to be controlled by the police?
EBONY HOWARD: There is no
question that many
of the students that are in
school districts
like the Birmingham City School
District have
very big challenges to overcome
with regard
to socioeconomic status and
poverty.
But I would also say that a lot
of this talk,
a lot of this rhetoric is just
propaganda.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You're
saying that
most of what these young people
who have been
maced have been doing, in other
schools, are
regarded as normal adolescent
behavior that
gets punished, but not in the
same way.
EBONY HOWARD: That is precisely
right, that
when a black boy engages in a
certain type
of misbehavior, there is a
perception that
that is criminal.
In contrast, when a white boy in
a different
school district does the same
thing, that
is perceived as adolescent
misconduct.
That's an inequity that black
children and
Latino children have to live
with in this
country.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
the police,
of course, defended the actions
of the police,
saying that these children
deserved what they
got.
And yet the judge, in his
ruling, affirmed
your protest.
EBONY HOWARD: Right.
You know, what I thought was the
most striking
about the findings of fact and
conclusions
of law that the judge issue was
that he recognized
that these are children, that
these are adolescents,
and that the police officers, at
least the
ones who were the defendants in
this case,
didn't quite understand that,
whether intentionally
or unintentionally.
The judge said that, regardless,
it is clear
that Chief A.C. Roper, the chief
of police
for the Birmingham Police
Department, at a
minimum needs to provide
officers who are
stationed in the Birmingham City
schools with
training on school-based
policing.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You
worked with the
chiefs are other police leaders
to work on
this problem, and what's going
on?
EBONY HOWARD: The judge ordered
that we get
with the defendants to meet and
confer on
developing a plan that would
guide law enforcement
training for school-based
policing, as well
as policies and procedures on
school-based
policing for Birmingham City
schools.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, how
is that going?
EBONY HOWARD: So, we have met.
And we agree on some things, but
were unable
to reach a consensus on other
things.
And the chief of police has told
us that he
intends to appeal and has gone
through the
process of appealing.
And we believe that the point of
public education
in America is not just to teach
kids academics,
but to teach them how to be
citizens, how
to be adults.
And that involves learning how
to manage conflict,
learning how to work with each
other, learning
how to respect people and that,
during that
process, they will make
mistakes.
They may fight, they may talk
back, they may
do things that we don't want
them to do.
And the role of teachers and
principals and
police officers are to teach
them how to interact
with each other.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, what
is the solution?
EBONY HOWARD: The first thing is
that, if
we're going to have officers in
our schools,
then they need to be trained.
They need not be biased with
regard to race
or socioeconomic status for the
students that
they are working with.
And then the more fundamental
thing and the
harder thing is that, when each
of us looks
at these kids, we need to see
our own.
We see someone who could be our
daughter,
our son, niece, our nephew, our
cousin, our
own babies, rather than seeing
an other.
And that's not happening.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Ebony Howard,
thank you.
EBONY HOWARD: Thank you so much.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight: how
three became
one.
Jeffrey Brown talks to a new
musical group
getting much attention this
summer.
JEFFREY BROWN: The
pre-performance huddle
in which three
singer-songwriters with
successful
solo careers morph into one
group.
Neko Case, K.D. Lang, and Laura
Veirs become
Case/Lang/Veirs.
Neko Case, K.D. Lang, and Laura
Veirs become
Case/Lang/Veirs.
The collaboration was the
brainchild of Lang,
who wanted to form what she
calls a:
K.D.
LANG, Musician: Folk punk girl
group.
JEFFREY BROWN: The three women
released an
album earlier this summer.
GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Donald
Trump attempts a campaign reset
with a focus
on the economy, while Hillary
Clinton holds
tight to a lead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: The
Rio Olympic
Games are on. We round up the
best moments
of weekend wins, and some of the
lingering
controversy over doping.
GWEN IFILL: And refugees moving
to Upstate
New York discover their health
care needs
move beyond what's visible.
KOWSAR ALI, Jericho Road: It's
actually hard
for them, because there's
nothing as depression.
They say, OK, because that never
existed in
my country. There's nothing as
depression.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Delta Air Lines
canceled more
than 400 flights today, after a
global crash
of its computer systems. Hours
later, the
carrier resumed limited service.
But the glitch
also delayed more than 1,000
flights, and
left passengers stranded. Some
complained
they'd been given little
information.
MAN: When I got here, I waited.
I got here
like 8:37 flight, and then it
kept going,
you know, delayed, delaying it.
And then they
never announced that it was
canceled. So I
had to call the service and they
told me it
was canceled. So they gave me
another flight,
but now I got a flight tomorrow.
So, it was
the fact that they didn't let me
know what
was going on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The trouble was
caused by a
power outage in Atlanta. The
utility Georgia
Power said a kind of industrial
circuit-breaker
called a switch gear failed.
Just last month,
Southwest Airlines was hit by an
equipment
failure that canceled 2000
flights.
GWEN IFILL: In Southwestern
Pakistan, a suicide
bombing killed at least 67
people today, and
wounded scores more. It happened
in a hospital
in the city of Quetta.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television
News reports.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Ambulances
usually arrive
at hospitals in a hurry. In
Quetta this morning,
they were leaving, ferrying the
injured away
from an attack on a hospital
itself. As smoke
filled the corridors, it quickly
became clear
the timing was deliberate.
First, men on a motorbike had
shot dead Bilal
Kasi, a senior lawyer on his way
to court.
Then the group waited for his
fellow lawyers
to gather here before blowing
them up, the
so-called double tap, as cynical
as it was
cruel.
MERAJ TAREEN, Attorney: After
our bar association
president was targeted, we all
came to the
hospital. We were leaving the
hospital after
Kasich's autopsy and the media
were interviewing
lawyers when the blast took
place. For many
minutes, there was darkness all
around us,
and then we heard gunshots.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Lawyers
complained to visiting
army chiefs that, while they
haven't been
allowed to drive their cars into
the hospital,
a suicide bomber had managed to
get through,
while the hospital's director
told the press
that just one guard armed with a
baton was
in charge of security, which
might seem all
the more scandalous, given that
these pictures
from January show the same
hospital, this
time receiving survivors from
another deadly
suicide bombing on another
medical facility
in the town.
So, once again, Pakistanis are
crying out
for security, putting pressure
on their Prime
Minister, Nawaz Sharif, and his
army chief,
who visited the hospital this
evening.
"For God sake, don't back off,"
this survivor
told the prime minister. "It's a
handful of
people we must fight with all
our might. Don't
lose courage."
GWEN IFILL: Both the Islamic
State group and
a breakaway Taliban faction
claimed responsibility
for the attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Japan's Emperor
Akihito signaled
today he'd like to step down.
His position
is symbolic, and he has no
political power,
but his abdication would require
a constitutional
change. He spoke in a rare
10-minute address
pre-recorded and broadcast
nationally.
EMPEROR AKIHITO, Japan (through
translator):
I am already more than 80 years
old, and fortunately
I am now in good health.
However, when I consider
that my fitness level is
gradually declining,
I am worried that it may become
difficult
for me to carry out my duties
with my whole
being as the symbol of the
state, as I have
done until now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Over the years,
Akihito has
had heart surgery and been
treated for prostate
cancer. He is the 125th emperor
in a dynastic
line that goes back more than
2,700 years.
GWEN IFILL: Parts of Eastern
Mexico are reeling
after the remnants of Hurricane
Earl touched
off deadly mudslides over the
weekend, killing
40 people. Surging rainwater
uprooted buildings
and tore through concrete walls
on Saturday.
Soldiers and first-responders
worked Sunday
to clear debris caked in mud.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wal-Mart is
moving to muscle
up in online sales, buying
online retailer
Jet.com. The deal announced
today includes
$3 billion in cash and $300
million in stock.
Wal-Mart is looking to
strengthen its Web
presence and capitalize on a
growing group
of customers who want to buy in
bulk online.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost 14
points to
close at 18,529. The Nasdaq fell
about eight
points, and the S&P 500 slipped
two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Russia fired
back today,
after its entire Paralympic team
was banned
from next month's games for
athletes with
physical disabilities. The
Russian Organizing
Committee said the ban for
alleged doping
amounts to a human rights abuse.
The same
doping scandal barred more than
100 Russian
athletes from the current
Olympics in Rio
de Janeiro. The Paralympics will
also be in
Rio.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump's
plan that he says will
revitalize the economy;
U.S. Olympians shattering
records and taking
home gold; a city caring for
refugees' unseen
needs; and much more.
GWEN IFILL: The two major
candidates for president
jostled for position in the last
week, stepping
into and out of political
corners, and attempting
to paint the other as unfit and
unstable.
Today, Donald Trump stuck to
policy, while
Hillary Clinton stuck it to
Donald Trump.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
These reforms will offer biggest
tax revolution
since the Reagan tax reform.
GWEN IFILL: Trump chose the
traditional campaign
setting of the Detroit Economic
Club to deliver
the sober outline of his
economic ideas, starting
with taxes.
DONALD TRUMP: I am proposing an
across-the-board
income tax reduction, especially
for middle-income
Americans. This will lead to
millions of new
and really good-paying jobs. The
rich will
pay their fair share, but no one
will pay
so much that it destroys jobs,
or undermines
our ability as a nation to
compete.
GWEN IFILL: But throughout his
scripted remarks,
Trump was regularly interrupted
at least a
dozen times by hecklers.
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you.
I will say, the Bernie Sanders
people had
far more energy and spirit.
GWEN IFILL: Trump's tax plan
envisions three
income tax brackets of 33
percent, 25 percent
and 12 percent. His original
plan, last fall,
topped out at 25 percent for the
wealthiest
earners.
Trump also argued for cutting
the top corporate
tax rate to 15 percent, less
than half what
it is now. The Republican
nominee also called
for a freeze on new government
regulation.
DONALD TRUMP: It is time to
remove the anchor
dragging us down. And that's
what it's doing.
It's dragging us down. Upon
taking office,
I will issue a temporary
moratorium on new
agency regulations.
GWEN IFILL: Trump said the
specifics of his
plan will be spelled out on his
Web site at
some point. But he used today's
remarks to
attack Hillary Clinton's
approach to economic
policy, saying, it punishes you
for working
and doing business in the United
States.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
It's clear -- and a lot of the
journalists
have written this -- that Trump
is scrambling
to do damage control.
GWEN IFILL: Clinton, who
campaigned in Florida
today, including a brewery tour
in St. Petersburg,
was quick to dismiss Trump's
economic plan.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He wants
to basically
just repackage trickle-down
economics.
(BOOING)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Now, you
know, that
old saying, fool me once, shame
on you, fool
me twice, shame on me?
GWEN IFILL: The candidates
sparred as Trump
tumbled in the polls after a
series of political
missteps last week. On Friday,
he finally
endorsed House Speaker Paul Ryan
and others
he had initially declined to
support.
Meanwhile, a new face, little
known GOP operative
Evan McMullin, said he is hoping
to capitalize
on Republican unease by
launching his own
independent bid for president.
Are the polls real? Will the
reset take?
For more on the state of this
topsy turvy
political year, we turn to
Politics Monday.
That's Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report
and Tamara Keith of NPR.
Welcome back, ladies.
Tamara, tell me about this Trump
speech today.
Was this the reset, the pivot we
keep talking
about?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Or was
the last one the pivot?
GWEN IFILL: Or was the last one?
TAMARA KEITH: Or was the last
one before that
the pivot?
Hillary Clinton just said this.
There is only
one Trump. There are different
flavors of
Donald Trump. There's
teleprompter speech,
policy speech Donald Trump,
which is what
we got today. There is rally
Donald Trump,
where he says stuff and gets the
crowd going,
and then there is Twitter Donald
Trump at
various hours of the day.
This is part -- about once every
month, we
get one of these teleprompter
speeches. In
some way, this was a reset. His
tax plan that
you mentioned in the piece, it
was on his
Web site until about 24 hours
ago. Then it
came down. Now there's a new tax
plan which
aligns with a tax plan from
House Republicans,
moves him more into the orbit of
the Republican
mainstream.
And there were several things in
this speech
that moved him a little bit
closer to the
Republican mainstream.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Go ahead, Amy.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
And I think that's the key,
because if you
look at the biggest challenge
for Donald Trump
right now, he's doing very well
among these
white working-class voters.
We keep talking about that.
Where he's not
doing well are white
white-collar voters.
And this was a message directly
related to
them. It was interesting to see
Hillary Clinton
talk about repackaging
Reaganomics.
For a lot of those voters who
right now are
saying either I'm voting for
Hillary Clinton
or I'm undecided on Donald
Trump, they kind
of like the Reaganomics message.
They like
the tax cut message. They like
the lack of
regulation -- or scaling back on
regulation
message.
And the economy is one -- of the
14 different
areas that The Wall Street
Journal poll asked
who do you think does a better
job of question,
Donald Trump only was ahead on
four of those.
One of those was the economy.
This is a place where, if I were
that campaign,
I would be spending much more
time talking
about the economy, a lot less
time beating
up on your fellow Republicans.
GWEN IFILL: And of course we are
going to
hear more from Hillary Clinton
on the subject
later -- or as the week goes on
apparently
every day.
Tam, let's talk about last
week's unforced,
or were they unforced errors,
the errors,
the series of errors. Is that
what led us
to today, to the teleprompter
speech?
TAMARA KEITH: It certainly would
seem like
he needed a reset.
He need to have a clean break
from last week's
sort of rolling errors. But,
even as late
as yesterday, he was tweeting
fact-checks
about the baby, the baby being a
baby that...
GWEN IFILL: Crying baby that he
made the joke
about.
TAMARA KEITH: There was a crying
baby. And
then he made a joke and it was
interpreted
as him kicking a baby out of a
rally, when
maybe the baby had already left.
But as late as yesterday, he was
tweeting
about this. So today's speech,
the challenge
is, we are getting closer and
closer to the
general election. And in today's
speech, he
said I will have more specifics,
I will have
details on my Web site, tune in,
in a couple
of weeks. We have heard that
before. And so
I wait for digging into policy,
but maybe
this race isn't really about
policy.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: That's part of the
question.
But on the other hand, let's
just measure
this by -- just for giggles, by
conventional
measures. Hillary Clinton,
including during
the Olympics, is hammering him
with anti-Trump
ads. Not a peep in conventional
sense coming
from Donald Trump.
AMY WALTER: Right.
He still has yet to show us that
he's going
to run a traditional campaign.
Now, look,
he's gotten this far.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Not one ad, not one
television
ad.
AMY WALTER: Not one television
ad. He doesn't
have a traditional anything.
Right?
And he's gotten this far. And so
this is what
we have been going back and
forth about for
this entire campaign, which is
he's either
going to show us at the end of
the day that
he's upended all the rules of
politics, that
you don't need these fancy
consultants, you
don't need ads, you don't need
polls, you
don't need any of it, just your
personality
and your message and the
environment alone
can drive voters to the polls.
GWEN IFILL: But let me try
something with
you.
AMY WALTER: Yes, please.
GWEN IFILL: When we were sitting
at the conventions
and we heard him say, "I am your
voice," I
think we all agreed that that
was his message,
that he had settled on a
message. We have
not heard that since.
AMY WALTER: Well, I think still
to the voters
that support him, that still is
the message,
that he is going to be the
person that stands
up for us.
His challenge is that he hasn't
broadened
it beyond that same group of
voters he was
speaking to at the convention.
And this speech
for the first time what he did
was he married
the traditional sort of Chamber
of Commerce,
Republican message on taxes and
entitlements
with the populist, anti-NAFTA,
anti-trade
message that he's been saying on
the trial,
trying to bring the party
together.
Again, unifying the party has
been a challenge
that he continues to struggle
with. And until
he figures that out, Hillary
Clinton is going
to continue to have a lead.
GWEN IFILL: Well, and also for
the first time,
we have seen kind of both
candidates talking
about mental stability as an
issue, speaking
about their opponent.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
Hillary's campaign begun this
several months
-- or at least a month ago, I
would say, talking
about whether he's
temperamentally fit to
be president. At the convention,
Michael Bloomberg
said, let's choose a sane
candidate.
And that was a big moment.
Here's a major
figure at a convention talking
about sanity.
Donald Trump this week seems to
have gone
to the "I know you are, but what
am I?" school,
and now he's saying that Hillary
Clinton is
temperamentally unfit.
GWEN IFILL: Based on her comment
saying that
she short-circuited an answer on
e-mails.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, she
short-circuited an
answer.
This has also spawned some
conspiracy theories
about her health.
GWEN IFILL: So, let's talk about
someone else
getting into the race, someone
probably I
think it's fair the three of us
had never
heard of, a gentleman by the
name of Evan
McMullin, who says he's going to
represent
all the Republicans who are not
for Trump.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Who is he?
AMY WALTER: He's a former CIA
operative. He's
a former House staffer. He now
is retired
from his position at the House.
This is what we have been
talking about, I
feel like, at this table for so
long. You
have this group of Republicans
who say they
can't support Trump, but they
can't find somebody
else to rally around.
Here is his challenge, getting
on ballots
in many states. The deadlines
have closed.
GWEN IFILL: The same time -- the
last time
we talked about David French
right now, yes.
AMY WALTER: Remember that, David
French? His
challenge, getting on ballots.
This is a candidate who also
went to BYU,
the thought being he could play
well in a
place like Utah or Arizona that
have a big
Mormon population. Arizona, you
have to get
a lot of signatures to get on
the ballot.
And the deadline there is the
first week in
September.
Utah, not as arduous, but that
means just
like one or two states that he
may have an
impact on. And, quite frankly,
if we're talking
about Arizona in Utah in
September and October,
this race is a blowout. Like,
it's not even
going to be lose. We might as
well just sleep
in on Election Day.
GWEN IFILL: But except it
doesn't seem at
all to be the case.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
GWEN IFILL: At least, no one is
willing to
quite go that far.
So, the Friday light, late
night, programmed
against the Olympics endorsement
of Paul Ryan,
Kelly Ayotte, and John McCain,
does that help
them at all, or does it hurt
them?
TAMARA KEITH: No.
And it really looked like those
endorsements
came under duress. He was
reading. He looked
uncomfortable saying it. No, it
doesn't help
them.
AMY WALTER: Yes. If I were
Senator Kelly Ayotte,
who right now is looking at a
very, very tough
race in a state that's now
turning away from
Donald Trump, I would be like,
you know what,
thanks, but that's OK, you can
keep your endorsement.
GWEN IFILL: And I think that's
kind of what
Paul Ryan said, which was,
that's nice.
AMY WALTER: That's nice, but I
don't...
GWEN IFILL: You don't think it
necessarily
helps? You don't think it
necessarily helps?
TAMARA KEITH: No, they're in a
tough spot.
All of these people who are
down-ballot are
in a tough spot, because they
don't -- they
have already on some level
associated themselves
with the person at the top of
the ticket.
And at the same time, they are
trying to distance
themselves. And Democrats aren't
going to
let them get away with
distancing themselves
one bit.
GWEN IFILL: And brace for
whatever may happen
this week, as opposed to last
week.
AMY WALTER: Yes. Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara Keith of NPR,
Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report,
thank you both
very much.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For all of the
concerns and
problems leading into Rio, the
first days
of the Olympics generally went
off well, with
memorable moments, and the hope
of a promising
week to come for the USA.
After one weekend in Rio,
American swimmers
are living up to golden
expectations so far.
Powerhouse swimmer Katie Ledecky
grabbed her
first gold medal of these games
Sunday night,
breaking her own world record in
the 400-meter
freestyle, with competitors
almost five seconds
in her wake.
KATIE LEDECKY, Olympic Gold
Medal Winner:
It's an amazing feeling, to sing
the national
anthem and see the flags raised.
I got to
go out there with a teammate and
we sang our
hearts out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Veteran Michael
Phelps, who's
now 31 years old, collected his
19th gold,
as part of the men's 4-by-100
relay team.
Also Sunday, the U.S. women
gymnastics team
proved their dominance in
qualifying for the
all-around category, which
permits only two
per country. Favorite Simone
Biles soared
to the number one spot.
Teammate Aly Raisman will join
her in the
finals, edging out 2012 gold
medalist Gabby
Douglas for the second U.S.
slot. And, today,
fencer Ibtihaj Muhammad became
the first American
Olympian to compete wearing a
Muslim hijab,
or head scarf. She won her first
round, before
being defeated.
Meanwhile, uproars over doping
are still swirling
over Rio. Russian swimmer Yulia
Efimova faced
boos before a preliminary race
on Sunday.
She had been banned after
failing drug tests,
and then reinstated. American
Lily King made
clear her displeasure about
Efimova's presence
in the pool.
And on Saturday, Australian
swimmer Mack Horton
accused his Chinese rival Sun
Yang of being
a -- quote -- "drug cheat" and
then beat him
in the 400-meter freestyle.
Chinese officials
have demanded an apology.
Now for an on-the-ground
perspective from
Rio, I spoke a short time ago to
Christine
Brennan, a sportswriter and
columnist who's
covering the Games for USA
Today. She's also
a contributor for ABC News.
Christine Brennan, hello.
It's been quite a weekend for
the United States
in swimming. Tell us what it's
been like at
the swimming venue.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today: I
will tell
you, Judy, it was really an
electric evening
and certainly for the United
States last night,
with both Katie Ledecky in the
400 freestyle,
world record performance,
breaking her on
world record by almost two
seconds.
And then within, what, maybe 20,
30 minutes,
you had that relay, of course,
Michael Phelps
coming back to the pool for the
first time,
31 years old now, his fifth
Olympic Games.
And what does he do? He's in the
second leg
of that four-person relay and he
stakes the
U.S. out to a lead, and the U.S.
-- his two
teammates just came in and won,
beating the
French.
The crowd, you would have
thought it was a
U.S. crowd, in the sense that
here we are
in Rio. But it was a really
majestic moment,
I think, but with the knowledge
that the fans
had that they were watching
something special,
watching Michael Phelps return,
the greatest
Olympian of all time, winning
his 19th gold
medal.
So, those two things back to
back -- and Katie
Ledecky even said it after she
won. She goes,
"I think there's going to be
another gold
medal." She was the first for
the U.S. in
the pool. Usually, the U.S.
dominates in the
swimming pool. And I think we
will see that
over the next few days as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it about
Katie Ledecky?
What puts her far ahead of the
competition?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, I think
all of her
opponents would love to know
that.
She's competing really only
against herself.
The 800 freestyle is hers. She
will be even
farther ahead in that. People
should get used
to seeing that. She's just one
of these people
who has a wonderful attitude
about life, super
smart, going to Stanford, and
gets it, has
a great perspective, wonderful
family that
loves sports, and also, for
herself, just
a sense that she just wants to
better herself.
It sounds like a cliche, but she
just goes
out there, follows her coach's
orders, kind
of the model student, the model
athlete, and
just puts it together, and is
absolutely on
top of her game at the most
important moment
of her life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Michael
Phelps, as you
said, he's now 31 years old. He
came into
these Games with 18 gold medals.
He just picked
up another one last night. What
is he looking
to do in Rio?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, he's
got a lot more.
He's just beginning.
And people are going to say,
what, more Michael
Phelps? Yes. He's got the 100
butterfly, 200
butterfly, 200 individual medley
and probably
one more relay. So we're just
beginning to
see Phelps.
And this is shocking. When you
think about
this in sports, swimming is a
young person's
came. As I said, Katie Ledecky
is 19 years
old. Somebody of these people
are -- a lot
of teenagers in the pool.
And here's Michael Phelps, 31.
Now, he has
certainly had some difficulties
in his life.
He went to rehab after a second
DUI. He has
acknowledged his problems. But
the fact that
he could be so strong at 31 --
in most sports,
he would long since be retired,
in terms of
his age -- and yet he's just
still as dominant
as ever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then you have
the doping
allegations around the Russians
and others.
It's already causing a backlash
among a number
of the athletes. How is that
affecting things
there?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: I will tell
you, it's been
really interesting.
And I think the metaphor for the
entire conversation,
Judy, about Russian doping, the
diabolical
Russian doping machine and the
fact that they
were allowed to compete in the
Olympics, as
opposed to being kicked out, as
I thought
they should be, the metaphor
really is -- the
pool is a metaphor for that.
The booing for these athletes,
Yulia Efimova
especially, the breast stroker,
loud boos
for her, loud boos for the
Russian men's 4x100
freestyle relay team, you never
hear that,
ever.
And what is that? That's the
swimmers. That's
coming especially coming from
the swimming
section. The swimmers know. They
know. They're
disgusted by this. And I know
people will
say, hey, Lance Armstrong
cheated and Marion
Jones. The U.S. has probably
given the world
the two worst cheaters ever in
Lance Armstrong
and Marion Jones.
The big difference is that for
Russia it was
government-sponsored,
state-sponsored doping.
The equivalent would be if a
member of President
Obama's Cabinet ran a five-year
doping plan
in the United States involving
the FBI, the
CIA, U.S. Olympic Committee, and
U.S. Anti-Doping
Agency. That's how diabolical
the Russian
plan was.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One other sport
Gymnastics,
this was the first Olympics
appearance for
Simone Biles of the United
States, who she
absolutely lived up to her
billing in that
qualifying event yesterday.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh, she sure
did.
Think Mary Lou Retton and Gabby
Douglas and
Olga Korbut and Nadia Comaneci
into one. In
many ways, we are seeing the
culmination of
an entire sport in one person.
Simone Biles
is that good. And the U.S. team
is that good.
This is a sport the you can have
a point,
a tenth of a point deciding
first, second,
third. The U.S. was 10 points
ahead as a team
in the qualifying yesterday. And
the team,
the U.S. team, will certainly
win the gold
medal, barring some incredible
unforeseen
occurrence tomorrow.
So there's that. That's the team
competition.
Then Simone Biles in the
individual all-around,
she is expected to win the gold.
And then
she is expected to go on to the
individual
apparatuses and actually keep
winning gold.
And Simone Biles, I believe by
the time these
Olympic Games are over, will be
seen as the
greatest U.S. gymnast ever. And
I'll tell
you, that's saying something,
because there
is certainly a lot of
competition for that
title.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally,
Christine, after all
the hype and the negative
stories about Brazil,
about Rio running up to these
Olympics, how
do these first few days feel to
you?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Judy, I have
to say that
these Games have been a pleasant
surprise.
There are issues with
transportation and buses
not coming and things like that,
but it really
feels like an Olympics to me.
And when I say
that, I mean everything about
it. The opening
ceremony, I thought, was
actually terrific
on a budget. They did more with
less, far
less budget than, say -- far
fewer dollars
to spend than Beijing in '08
with their grandiose
ceremony or London in 2012.
And I thought they did a great
job with a
message, with a conscience. And
I think that
has carried over the last few
days. You have
seen good will in many places.
Of course,
I mentioned the booing, but good
will in many
places.
You have seen great upsets. You
have seen
athletes care so much about
this. And the
Games are moving on. Knock on
wood. We will
see how it goes over the next
two weeks. But
they really seem to be going on
just fine.
When you consider the National
Football League
had to cancel its Hall of Fame
game because
of a problem on the field, they
couldn't put
on one football game, and here
Rio is seemingly
them moving ahead with all of
these venues,
and so far, so good. I think
that's in many
ways a big sports upset, but
it's also a nice
thing to see as the Games have
started.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christine
Brennan, thank you
very much. And we look forward
to talking
to you in the days to come.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: You bet,
Judy. Thank you
very much.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
efforts to make
peace between high schoolers and
police; and
the harmonies of Neko Case, K.D.
Lang and
Laura Veirs.
But, first: President Obama has
pledged to
accept 10,000 Syrian refugees by
October,
despite resistance playing out
in many communities.
Refugees, many of them rootless
for years,
often arrive with significant
medical problems
and psychological trauma.
Special correspondent Sarah
Varney brings
us this report about how one
city, Buffalo,
New York, is adapting. Her story
was produced
in collaboration with our
partner Kaiser Health
News.
SARAH VARNEY: Since Murhaf,
Ghenwa, and their
children moved here from Syria,
even mundane
tasks like cooking and homework
have become
more complicated.
MAN: They have 10 airplanes.
SARAH VARNEY: Unaccustomed tote
this new life,
the family relies on help from
Hassan Alishaqi
from a local resettlement agency
called Journey's
End.
Refugee agencies help families
like this one
find housing and jobs, get
medical care and
health insurance and enroll in
English classes
and schools. They fled Syria
after civil war
erupted there in 2011,
unleashing an exodus
of more than four million
refugees. The destruction
and violence came close to
Murhaf's family
during one their last nights in
the city of
Homs.
MAN (through translator): Some
bullets came
to my house through the window.
And I was
afraid for the safety of my
kids. They never
sleep because of -- it's just
very hard for
them to sleep.
SARAH VARNEY: After a year in
Cairo and exhaustive
security checks, the family
arrived in Buffalo,
a quiet city on the edge of Lake
Erie. And
like many new arrivals here,
they're struggling
with the aftermath of their
horrific journey
as they attempt to build
healthier lives in
their new home.
More than 90 percent of the
refugees who resettle
to New York live in Upstate New
York. The
city of Buffalo has become a
welcoming haven
for many of them. But over the
last 15 years,
the countries and conflicts they
come from
have changed. And the health
care needs of
refugees are changing, too.
Jericho Road is a community
health center
in Buffalo that has long treated
refugees
from some of the world's poorest
countries,
including Myanmar, Bhutan, Sudan
and Somalia.
The clinic is a crossroads of
languages and
customs. New refugees receive
free medical
assistance from the federal
government for
eight months. Then they can buy
private insurance
or enroll in Medicaid.
DR. MYRON GLICK, Jericho Road:
When you came,
we found that your T.B. test was
positive.
So I think you are now taking
medicine for
that, right?
SARAH VARNEY: The clinic's
founder, Dr. Myron
Glick, often treats refugees for
tuberculosis,
malaria and childhood
malnutrition. But he
says the more recent arrivals
from Iraq and
Syria, which are middle-income
countries,
typically don't suffer from
diseases of poverty,
but instead have been
traumatized by war.
A critical report by local
leaders that examined
the area's safety net found that
health care
providers urgently need to
improve culturally
appropriate mental health
services. And more
clinics needed to follow Jericho
Road's model,
hiring refugees who can help new
arrivals
adjust.
Kowsar Ali, a Somali and Arabic
interpreter,
says just figuring out how to
explain a patient's
symptoms and a doctor's
diagnosis is a puzzle,
words and phrases with no
English equivalent,
medical terms like PTSD and
depression that
are unfamiliar.
KOWSAR ALI, Jericho Road: It's
actually hard
for them because there's nothing
as depression.
They say, OK, because that never
existed in
my country. There's nothing as
depression.
SARAH VARNEY: Dr. Glick says the
initial relief
refugees feel when they reach
safety often
gives way to a new reality.
DR. MYRON GLICK: All the
horrible things that
happen to people along their
journey to America,
and yet really they come with
hope. And a
year, two years in, you see that
hope dissipate.
It's really challenging here in
America to
deal with the stresses that are
thrust upon
them without the support of
their home community.
SARAH VARNEY: That sense of
isolation is easing
for some. Ali Kadhum arrived in
Buffalo in
2008, just as the fledgling
Iraqi community
was taking root. Back then,
Kadhum says there
were just 25 families.
ALI KADHUM, Lake Shore
Behavioral Health:
Now it's almost 750 Iraqi
families.
SARAH VARNEY: Today, he says
Iraqis bump into
each other around town.
ALI KADHUM: They feel they are
not alone.
They feel they are still living
in Iraq, because
people, there's restaurants,
cook their food
here. There is some people speak
their language,
at least, and they can
communicate.
SARAH VARNEY: So many refugees
have moved
here that the population of Erie
County, home
to Buffalo, is growing for the
first time
since the 1960s. And they are
reshaping a
city that has struggled to find
its way in
the modern economy. Old
factories now house
English-language classes.
At a small business incubator,
women sell
Iraqi macrame and Rwandan
scarves, and vendors
claim to sell the best dim sum
in Buffalo.
Refugee children pursue music in
a program
called Buffalo String Works, and
are mentored
by professional musicians.
Health systems here are
adapting, too. A Catholic
Church once, filled with Italian
and Irish
congregates, recently reopened
as a health
clinic for new immigrants. And
with so many
arrivals from active war zones,
the University
at Buffalo tapped Dr. Kim
Griswold to help
lead the Western New York Center
for Survivors
of Torture.
DR. KIM GRISWOLD, Western New
York Center
for Survivors of Torture: Some
of the folks
that we have seen have been
horribly tortured
physically, with scars to prove
it, amputations,
other things that we have seen
that are horrific,
cigarette burns, whipping.
SARAH VARNEY: Kareem Khaleefah,
who worked
for the U.S. Army in Baghdad,
was kidnapped
by a Shia militia, lined up with
20 other
men and shot.
KAREEM KHALEEFAH, Worked for
U.S. Army (through
translator): I was like super
lucky that the
bullets come on the side of my
body.
SARAH VARNEY: He fell to the
ground and pretended
to be dead until nightfall.
Even in Buffalo's quiet
neighborhoods, those
memories never fade, says
Kadhum, a mental
health counselor at Lake Shore
Behavioral
Health. He says many older
Iraqis, like Saja
Alnaqeeb and her husband,
Mahmoud, once lived
prosperous, vibrant lives. Then,
in 2005,
Saja was tortured and the family
fled. Now
she stays inside, tormented by
her memories.
WOMAN (through translator): My
family, sometimes,
they wake up, they find me
screaming at night
with these nightmares.
SARAH VARNEY: The images she
sees on the news
are a constant reminder of the
continuing
violence in Iraq. She worries
about her children
and grandchildren still in
Baghdad.
WOMAN (through translator): My
mind is about
them. Every time they mention to
me they are
unsafe, they are getting
threatened, they
move their place from place to
place just
to make sure that they are --
protect their
kids and family.
SARAH VARNEY: The recent spate
of violent
attacks worldwide have fueled
anti-immigrant
and anti-refugee sentiment. But
experts on
human migration say these events
are rare,
and, in fact, it's refugees who
often face
discrimination and violence.
Neil Boothby is a professor at
Columbia University.
NEIL BOOTHBY, Columbia
University: There's
going to be language issues.
There's going
to be cultural issues. What
happens if a girl
wants to wear a scarf over her
head? How is
the community going to respond
to that? What
if people need to spend a lot of
time in the
mosques? How are we going to
respond to that?
So it's going to be an
adjustment, I think,
for each side.
SARAH VARNEY: In Buffalo, the
focus now is
to enroll more people in mental
health counseling.
At a Lake Shore clinic,
patients, like Kurd
Bllnd struggle to reconcile
religion, sectarian
and ethnic violence that has
persisted for
decades.
KURD BLLND, Patient (through
translator):
What happened to the Kurdish in
Iraq, of course
you're going to be upset and
angry and anxious.
SARAH VARNEY: Bllnd, who grew up
in a Kurdish
village in Iraq, was jailed and
interrogated
for three years in the 1980s.
KURD BLLND (through translator):
Since the
age of 12 years until now -- I'm
67 years
of age -- I didn't see anything
good in life.
SARAH VARNEY: Two years after he
arrived in
Buffalo, Bllnd reluctantly
agreed to seek
help.
KURD BLLND: They told me, if you
go there,
somebody talk to you. Maybe you
forget past,
what happened to you.
JESSICA MARMION, Lake Shore
Behavioral Health:
The key stressor, I think, is
isolation. So,
they come here, they don't speak
the language,
they really only know their
immediate family.
SARAH VARNEY: Jessica Marmion is
a clinical
social worker who teams up with
interpreter
Afaf Pickering.
AFAF PICKERING, Lake Shore
Behavioral Health:
We have like all kinds of people
coming. We
have lawyers. We have
businesspeople. We have
-- you need sometimes to talk
about your problems,
especially coming from a country
of war. You
went through trauma. You went
through death.
You went through some violence.
So, we're
not superhuman.
SARAH VARNEY: As new refugees
arrive each
day in Buffalo, known as the
City of Good
Neighbors, health care leaders
say they will
continue to listen, to reach
out, and help
refugee families find new
opportunities in
a changing American city.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Kaiser Health News,
I'm Sarah Varney in Buffalo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last September, a
federal court
in Alabama ruled that the
Birmingham Police
Department's disciplinary
practices, including
the use of pepper spray for
minor discipline
problems, is in violation of
student rights
and unconstitutional.
Attorney Ebony Howard of the
Southern Poverty
Law Center filed the
class-action suit, and
returns to court next month when
the police
department's appeal is heard.
As part of our year-long Race
Matters conversations
focusing on solutions, special
correspondent
Charlayne Hunter-Gault reports
from Birmingham
about reducing tensions between
African-American
high school students and the
police.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: This
video of a white
South Carolina policeman roughly
ejecting
a black student from her
classroom went viral
and ignited a conversation about
the proper
role for police in schools.
Ebony Howard, a lawyer with the
Southern Poverty
Law Center, has been involved in
that conversation
as a result of her successful
suit against
police macing students in
Montgomery, Alabama.
Ebony Howard, thank you for
joining us.
EBONY HOWARD, Southern Poverty
Law Center:
Thank you for having me.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Can you
tell us briefly
about the case you won in
Birmingham last
year?
EBONY HOWARD: Sure.
The case was about police
officers who are
stationed in Birmingham City
high schools
who are there to protect
students, and they
were using mace, or pepper spray
is what it's
sometimes called, against
students for engaging
in what amounts to normal
adolescent behavior.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Like
what?
EBONY HOWARD: Like, for example,
one of our
plaintiffs, plaintiff K.B., she
was leaving
class and going to another class
with a fellow
classmate. And as she walked, a
boy came up
to her and started to call her
really foul
names that I won't repeat.
But as he called her those
names, his friends
who had come with him, they
started to laugh.
And the more they laughed, the
more names
he called her. And so she tried
to walk away
from him. And as she walked
away, he followed
her and his friends followed
her, and he continued
to call her lots and lots of
names.
And so eventually, as she walked
the entire
length of the school building,
she started
to cry. And she became
hysterical. And when
she reached the end of the
school building,
a police officer walked up. And
you would
think that he would have taken
care of her,
but what he did was, he told her
to calm down
or he was going to arrest her.
And when she didn't stop crying,
he put her
in handcuffs. And she continued
to cry after
he handcuffed her, and he told
her, calm down.
And when she didn't calm down
fast enough,
he sprayed her with mace.
The other point that I forgot to
mention,
though, was that she was four
months' pregnant
at the time when he sprayed her
with mace.
She was arrested and taken to
the local juvenile
facility, where she had to take
off her pants
and her underwear and squat and
cough as a
part of a strip search.
And so those are the kinds of
things that
were happening in Birmingham
City schools.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Now, you
argued the
things that are happening to
black students,
with examples like the ones you
just gave,
are very different from what
happens in white
schools.
Tell me just how different.
EBONY HOWARD: Right.
So, for example, the Birmingham
City School
System is 99 percent
African-American; 85
percent of the students are on
free and reduced
lunch. In contrast, a
neighboring school district,
the Jefferson County School
District, is much
more integrated, has far more
white students.
In the past 10 years, police
officers who
are in the Jefferson County
School District
have used mace 10 times. That's
over 10 years.
In contrast, during a five-year
period in
Birmingham City, almost 300
students were
sprayed with mace.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
what do you
say to the critics who say that
a lot of these
kids are violent, that some are
gang members,
and that they get into
horrendous fights and
things like that in these
schools and need
to be controlled by the police?
EBONY HOWARD: There is no
question that many
of the students that are in
school districts
like the Birmingham City School
District have
very big challenges to overcome
with regard
to socioeconomic status and
poverty.
But I would also say that a lot
of this talk,
a lot of this rhetoric is just
propaganda.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You're
saying that
most of what these young people
who have been
maced have been doing, in other
schools, are
regarded as normal adolescent
behavior that
gets punished, but not in the
same way.
EBONY HOWARD: That is precisely
right, that
when a black boy engages in a
certain type
of misbehavior, there is a
perception that
that is criminal.
In contrast, when a white boy in
a different
school district does the same
thing, that
is perceived as adolescent
misconduct. That's
an inequity that black children
and Latino
children have to live with in
this country.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
the police,
of course, defended the actions
of the police,
saying that these children
deserved what they
got.
And yet the judge, in his
ruling, affirmed
your protest.
EBONY HOWARD: Right.
You know, what I thought was the
most striking
about the findings of fact and
conclusions
of law that the judge issue was
that he recognized
that these are children, that
these are adolescents,
and that the police officers, at
least the
ones who were the defendants in
this case,
didn't quite understand that,
whether intentionally
or unintentionally.
The judge said that, regardless,
it is clear
that Chief A.C. Roper, the chief
of police
for the Birmingham Police
Department, at a
minimum needs to provide
officers who are
stationed in the Birmingham City
schools with
training on school-based
policing.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You
worked with the
chiefs are other police leaders
to work on
this problem, and what's going
on?
EBONY HOWARD: The judge ordered
that we get
with the defendants to meet and
confer on
developing a plan that would
guide law enforcement
training for school-based
policing, as well
as policies and procedures on
school-based
policing for Birmingham City
schools.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, how
is that going?
EBONY HOWARD: So, we have met.
And we agree
on some things, but were unable
to reach a
consensus on other things.
And the chief of police has told
us that he
intends to appeal and has gone
through the
process of appealing. And we
believe that
the point of public education in
America is
not just to teach kids
academics, but to teach
them how to be citizens, how to
be adults.
And that involves learning how
to manage conflict,
learning how to work with each
other, learning
how to respect people and that,
during that
process, they will make
mistakes.
They may fight, they may talk
back, they may
do things that we don't want
them to do. And
the role of teachers and
principals and police
officers are to teach them how
to interact
with each other.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, what
is the solution?
EBONY HOWARD: The first thing is
that, if
we're going to have officers in
our schools,
then they need to be trained.
They need not
be biased with regard to race or
socioeconomic
status for the students that
they are working
with.
And then the more fundamental
thing and the
harder thing is that, when each
of us looks
at these kids, we need to see
our own. We
see someone who could be our
daughter, our
son, niece, our nephew, our
cousin, our own
babies, rather than seeing an
other. And that's
not happening.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Ebony Howard,
thank you.
EBONY HOWARD: Thank you so much.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight: how
three became
one.
Jeffrey Brown talks to a new
musical group
getting much attention this
summer.
JEFFREY BROWN: The
pre-performance huddle
in which three
singer-songwriters with
successful
solo careers morph into one
group.
Neko Case, K.D. Lang, and Laura
Veirs become
Case/Lang/Veirs.
The collaboration was the
brainchild of Lang,
who wanted to form what she
calls a:
K.D. LANG, Musician: Folk punk
girl group.
JEFFREY BROWN: The three women
released an
album earlier this summer. We
spoke before
a recent performance at the
Lincoln Theatre
in Washington, D.C.
K.D. LANG: I didn't know if it
was going to
work, but I thought it would be
interesting.
And I love these two artists as
individual
sources of great inspiration.
So one day, I just had the
instinct to call
them, to e-mail them, and they
wrote back
in half-an-hour.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Canadian-born
Lang, now
54, is the senior member of the
band, and
probably best known to the wider
public, selling
two million copies of her 1992
album, "Ingenue."
Neko Case, 45, has been a
mainstay of indie
rock and country music since the
late '90s,
both as a solo artist and with
the band the
New Pornographers; 42-year-old
Laura Veirs,
known for mixing classic country
and folk,
has turned out a range of work,
from a children's
record, to a film soundtrack, to
her 2013
album, "Warp and Weft," which
included contributions
from Case and Lang.
The three made an important
decision from
the start, that they would write
only original
songs for this effort, and write
them together
as much as possible.
NEKO CASE, Musician: I often
start with lyrics,
and I try to make sure that
they're accessible,
but slightly off.
And Laura uses a lot of
alternate tunings
as a guitar player. And she
comes up with
incredible melodies. You know,
when you first
hear them, they seem familiar to
you. And
then you sing them or play them,
and you realize
they're on a completely
different level, like
something familiar is so
completely brand-new.
And the different languages take
you outside
of your comfort zone.
LAURA VEIRS, Musician: How do
you meld minds
to come up with something that's
cohesive
and make a record that sounds
like it's not
like a variety show or
piecemeal? So, it was
a really hard project for us.
JEFFREY BROWN: So how'd you do
it?
LAURA VEIRS: Well, some of it is
just like
gritting our teeth, like, what
are we going
to write about today? I don't
know. Let's
go take a walk. Oh, there's a
fireworks stand.
Oh, there's a fireworks named
Delirium.
That's a good song title. Let's
go write a
song. Oh, we can't finish it.
Well, here's
Neko. She'd kind of come in and
write a bridge
and finish it. And she took that
song, "Delirium,"
and made it her own, and added
her own lyrics
and vocals.
NEKO CASE: Being the boss of
your own career,
you get used to having veto
power and getting
what you want, or as close to
what you want
as you have mapped out, you
know?
JEFFREY BROWN: You didn't get
that in this
case?
NEKO CASE: Not always. And it
was a really
excellent exercise..
K.D. LANG: It was a difficult
process at times.
Like Neko said, we're used to
having our own
veto power as individual
artists. And to hear
somebody say, no, I just don't
like that bridge
is excruciating at times.
(LAUGHTER)
LAURA VEIRS: And we all sulked.
We sulked.
We pouted.
NEKO CASE: Yes, there was some
sulking. But
we...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: You're laughing
as you say
it now, right?
K.D. LANG: Yes, but what that
ended up doing,
because we didn't have a
language, we weren't
friends, we didn't have a
vernacular, a common
vernacular between us, so we had
to swiftly
develop one.
JEFFREY BROWN: They took turns
as lead singers.
On "Honey and Smoke," it was
Lang, with the
other two on backup. The
collaboration has
brought great reviews from
critics and a summer-long
tour around the U.S.
You all three had success. I
assume tough
times as well. Being a working
musician, has
it been a good life?
LAURA VEIRS: I say yes. I feel
every night
like, I can't believe this is my
job. Like,
I get to do this. I love the
solitary aspect
of writing, because usually I
write solitary,
by myself. But I love the
teamwork aspect
of the touring and the
recording.
K.D. LANG: I like the music. I
don't like
the business. I get very tired
of the travel
and moving, constantly moving.
But the hour-and-a-half
that I'm making music, I'm one
of the happiest
people on earth.
NEKO CASE: Around 2010, I kind
of looked up
and said, I'm 40 years old. You
know, I chose
music. I don't have a husband. I
don't have
any kids. Like, I chose music.
So, I had to
make a decision. Like, do I want
to do something
else, or do I want to go from
journeyman to
master?
And I realized, you know, I want
to be a really
good musician. So, this
particular opportunity
happening at that time was this
beautiful
kismet.
JEFFREY BROWN: For now, at
least, Neko Case,
K.D. Lang, and Laura Veirs say
this is a one-off
project, one album and one tour.
And they
will savor the collaborative
moment of Case/Lang/Veirs
before returning to their solo
careers.
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Online right now,
get a preview
of our upcoming profile of Alexi
Pappas, a
Greek-American long-distance
runner competing
at the Rio Games who's also a
poet. Watch
her read two of her poems about
pushing herself
to her limit.
All of that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose." Former acting CIA
Director Mike Morell
talks about America's challenges
overseas
and his endorsement of Hillary
Clinton.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will start a
two-part series
on living as an adult with
autism.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.